hi welcome to our concurrency unit and
operating systems they're trying
something different here which is have
you watched lectures at home and then
we'll work out homework style problems
in the classroom let's get started
well start each lecture with some
learning objectives these are the things
that you should learn from watching this
lecture our goal today is to first
identify uses of concurrency what is it
good for when do we use it identify
sources of concurrency where do we have
things happen at the same time I want
you to understand the schedulers role in
concurrency meaning how it is these
process scheduler which decides what to
run next impact concurrency I'd like you
to identify real-world examples of
concurrency how we work with multiple
things happening in the real world and
also identify how you solve these
problems in the real world and finally
I'd like you know the difference between
benign uses of concurrency that won't
cause any problems in your code from
other kinds of concurrency that really
need to be taken care of carefully so
let's start off by looking at
concurrency in the real world
what is concurrency it's really whenever
you have multiple things happening at
the same time that interact some
examples are shared bathrooms shared
food in an apartment and traffic lights
are shared streets so let's look at
these in more detail so here's a problem
you have a bathroom and you would like
to make sure that only one person goes
at the same time if two people go in at
once
nobody likes that so how do we deal with
this in the real world well the answer
is we put a lock on the door which
somebody inside can lock when they go in
to nobody in the outside can get into it
the rule is if you go to the bathroom
the door's locked you have to wait for
it so the point here is that we have
something that's shared which is the
bathroom and we have rules that express
how we share it between people to make
sure that bad things don't happen for
our next example let's look at shared
food and apartment suppose you share an
apartment with someone and you have a
problem that you would like to make sure
there's always fresh milk how do you
work this out with your apartment mates
well one way to do it is to have a note
on the door that says whether we need to
buy milk because you used up the milk
and there's none left and then another
note to say you're actually buying milk
you need the first note to tell the
other person there's no milk available
and they need to get it the second note
is needed to let them know that
you're buying milk so they won't go and
buy milk themselves and leave you with
too much milk so the note here is again
we have a shared resources which is the
milk in the apartment and we have rules
on how to share it meaning we have rules
that say notify somebody when milk is
needed so that we don't we will go get
more milk and notify somebody when
you're buying milk so we don't end up
with too much our third example is
traffic lights and shared streets again
we have a problem that we have a shared
resource which is the intersection that
cars in both directions want to go
through how do we make sure that cars
don't collide so again we have rules and
we have some state that help us figure
this out so we have a traffic light that
tells us which direction cars are
allowed to go and the rule is don't
enter the light don't enter the
intersection if the light is red or
yellow and when the light changes to
green in your direction wait for all the
cars in the intersection to exit if you
follow these rules then it's safe for
both directions through the intersection
and there won't be any collisions so
what do we learn from this well first of
all there are some properties of
concurrent systems the first thing is
that there's multiple actors involved
who can do things in this case it was
the multiple people wanting to use the
bathroom or there multiple people living
in the apartment or the multiple cars
that wanted to go into the intersection
second we have shared resources the
bathrooms the food and the street third
we need to have some rules that say how
do we share these resources safely one
person at a time uses the bathroom one
person buys food or only one direction
uses the traffic light at a time so how
does this apply to computer systems well
we have multiple actors inside an
operating system these are processes
multiple processes can run at the same
time or we might have multiple threads
within a single process that are running
at the same time so why am i you have
concurrency well we've seen many of
these before suppose you have one
process that is producing data and
another process that's consuming it here
we want to have the producer and the
consumer running at the same time but
they both have to access the shared data
for communication a second reason is
asynchronous i/o for example you might
want to have a web server that can read
data off disk and send it to the network
the network the disk and the web server
all act
the shared resource were worried about
is the data moving between the network
and the disk finally we might have
parallel programs where one thread will
split the problem into three smaller
problems work done by different threads
here the shared data is the data for the
program the actors are the different
threads the reason to do this is that it
makes the program run faster we have
multiple processes simply for
asynchronous i/o this can make things
faster because we can access the disk
and the net at the same time on
different threads producing consumer
stimuli we can make go faster because we
can produce the producing things while
we're consuming them so the properties
we have for concurrent computer systems
are very similar to the concurrent
systems we had in the real world we have
multiple actors in this case multiple
threads we have shared resources which
can be memory heap variables or global
variables or devices such as the network
or the disk so one thing to worry about
is well doesn't the scheduler handle
this for this because the scheduler
responsible for scheduling threads and
processes it is possible the scheduler
will help you out and make things run in
the right order however there's no
guarantee this happened in fact the only
guarantee the scheduler really makes is
there will be no starvation that every
thread or process will eventually run
schedulers generally make no guarantee
of fairness meaning that process a and
process B will run the same amount of
time or timeliness the process a and B
will get to run in some finite bounded
amount of time such as one second one
way to think about this is that when
reasoning about concurrency we really
try to think about the scheduler as an
adversary it will intentionally switch
between processes at the worst possible
time to cause the worst thing to happen
for example suppose we have the code
here shown here process a tries to count
up to 10 and will print a 1 when it gets
to 10 process B will try to count to
negative 10 and will print B 1 if it
gets a negative time what could happen
here well it's possible if you have a
unit processor that process a well if it
starts first will run and win right away
or process B if it starts with run and
run and win right away if a and B are
running at the same time then it's
possible that they'll sit there forever
and neither of them will ever win it
will ever win because they will take
turns incrementing
decrementing odd what this means is we
really can't count on the scheduler to
help us out in these problems so one
thing to know is when do we not have to
worry about concurrency when do we have
to not have to worry about multiple
threads running at the same time the
first case is when there's no shared
data or communication supposed to have
three threads operating on three
different data structures perhaps three
different arrays in this case they're
all working on separate data there's no
sharing and no communication so there's
no nothing to worry about the
concurrency the second time we don't
have to worry about it is when we have
read-only data meaning that it's
constant so even though we have shared
data and this is example a hash table
the threads are only reading it so
there's nothing that can go wrong
there's no chance that one thread will
modify the data and some other one will
see the wrong value because the data is
constant some examples of data that is
not shared are local variables in your
thread stack these are private to the
thread and generally not shared an
example of read-only constant data are
global constants that you compile into
your code so what about risky
concurrency when do we have to worry
about things well if we have multiple
threads accessing a shared variable
without any kind of rules to access it
we have a problem this is like having a
shared bathroom with no lock on the door
that people can walk in at any time the
second thing we worry about is when at
least one thread modifies the resource
so in our hash table example if one of
our threads is inserting into the hash
table what other ones are looking up
it's possible the threads might see the
hash table in the middle of an insert
and sees invalid pointer or a null
pointer in crash we call this a race
condition which is when we have two
threads that are accessing the same data
without any kind of rules for access and
we'll talk about this in the next
lecture so a standard example of where
concurrency matters is in a bank account
suppose you have a bank server that is
managing an account balance it has one
method a withdraw method that takes an
account number or count object and the
amount of money to withdraw and we have
two people trying to call it at the same
time shown here in pink and green both
times the code get called it does the
same thing it reads the balance from the
account it subtracts the amount of money
withdrawn from the balance and then
update
the accounts balance with the new value
and returns the current balance so this
seems like it's fine if two people draw
at the same time but let's look at what
can go wrong
suppose we start out with $100 now
remember these two functions are being
called by two different users meaning
logically in a computer system to run on
two different threads the scheduler as I
said can interleave these two threads in
any way we want
so suppose we have the interleaving here
where time is starting at the top and
going down so we start off with your
balance at $100 the first thread to
execute is the pink thread and it
executes up to the point where it
calculates the new balance at 90 dollars
if we now switch and start running the
green thread it will try to be removing
20 dollars and it'll execute down to the
point where it accounts so it's the
balance to be 80 dollars the pink
threads can start running again at this
point and it will save the balance as
$90 and return when the green thread
starts up it will save the value as
eight of the balances $80 and then
return the problem here is at the end of
this the account balance is left at $80
even though 30 dollars were removed from
the bank account and it began with a
balance of $100 the problem here is that
we have a race condition both threads
are modifying shared State which is the
bank account balance with no rules about
how they should be think Rijn eyes so
remembering why this happens we need to
look at what is shared as I said
concurrency is benign when we have
things that are not shared local
variables are not shared because they
refer to the threads stacked what this
means is that you should never store a
pointer to a local variable in a global
structure or else that threads deck may
become shared global variables are
however shared because they're stored in
the data segment that's accessible to
all threads through the name of the
global variable heap variables may or
may not be shared when he variables are
first initialized through the malloc
call only one thread has access to that
data
however if another thread can get a
pointer to it for example you store a
pointer in a global variable or you
store a pointer in another variable that
is already shared then that data becomes
shared this means that heap data
variables are only private or private if
only local variables can point to it so
how can we manage concurrency
well there's a couple of techniques that
computer scientists have developed over
the past 50 years for this problem the
first is a set of synchronization
mechanisms that allow programmers to
write rules on how to manage concurrency
just like the lock on the bathroom door
one of these is an Amissah T this is
basically make sure that while one
thread is modifying data no other
threads can change that data this is
somewhat of when you're in the bathroom
you make sure nobody else can come in
the bathroom the other major technique
is conditional synchronization these
allows code in different threads to run
in the correct order suppose for example
you want to make sure that code that
withdraws from a bank account waits
until there's enough money in the
account to withdraw conditional
synchronization would allow one thread
to wait until the bank balance is high
enough before the withdraw runs this is
the end of the first lecture in
concurrency please take the quiz on
concurrency before watching the next
lecture